Code for neighborhood analysis instruction notebook (#1044)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: spatial/06-neighborhood-analysis.Rmd

```{r outputs}
# path to analysis directory
analysis_dir <- file.path("analysis", "brca-xenium")
fs::dir_create(analysis_dir)

# path to output spe file
hoodscanr_results_file <- file.path(analysis_dir, "hoodscanr_spe.rds")
```

Now we'll read in the normalized object. 

```{r read-normalized, live = TRUE}
# read the normalized SpatialExperiment object created in the previous notebook
spe <- readr::read_rds(normalized_rds)
```

<!--TODO: We don't really need this section since we just looked at in the previous notebook, but I thought it would be helpful to have this plot here? I'm okay to take it out or replace it with a table of cell types if that's more helpful.-->
As a reminder, let's look at the cell types that are present in this dataset. 
We'll use the `cell_types_lumped` column that we created in the previous notebook for the plot and for the neighborhood analysis.

Since this is a new notebook, we'll need to set the palette of colors to use for each cell type again. 

```{r celltype-palette}
# build a custom palette mapping each cell type to a fixed color, so that
# colors stay consistent across every plot in the notebook

> cell_type_palette <- list(

Reviewer: I wonder if we might want this to be a file we read in? If we are using the same scheme across notebooks it seems like it might be a good practice to show.

  "Stromal" = "#F6222E",
  "Tumor" = "#3283FE", 
  "DCIS" = "#325A9B",
  "Macrophage" = "#85660D",
  "Myoepithelial cell" = "#F7E1A0",
  "Endothelial" = "#AA0DFE",
  "CD4+ T Cells" = "#16FF32",
  "CD8+ T Cells" = "#1C8356",
  "B Cells" = "#FC1CBF",
  "Perivascular-Like" = "#FEAF16",
  "Dendritic cell" = "#1CBE4F",
  "Mast Cells" = "#565656",
  "Unlabeled" = "grey90"
)

# unlabeled should be greyed out
cell_type_palette$Unlabeled <- "grey90"
```

Setting the cell type column as a factor lets us control the order the cell types appear in legends and plots.
We use the order of the palette we just defined so the two always match.

```{r set-celltype-levels}
# re-order celltypes for plotting by setting them as a factor,
# using the palette order as the factor level order
spe$cell_types_lumped <- as.factor(spe$cell_types_lumped) |> 

>   forcats::fct_relevel(names(cell_type_palette))

Reviewer: I'd probably do this in a single function call, but either way. 
```suggestion
spe$cell_types_lumped <- factor(
  spe$cell_types_lumped, 
  levels = names(cell_type_palette)
)
```

```

With the palette and factor levels in place, we can plot the cells in their spatial coordinates, colored by cell type.

```{r plot-celltypes}
#| fig.width: 8

# plot the cells at their spatial coordinates, colored by lumped cell type
ggspavis::plotCoords(spe, annotate = "cell_types_lumped") +
  scale_color_manual(values = cell_type_palette)
```

## Identifying cell neighborhoods with `hoodscanR` 

The core output of `hoodscanR` is a neighborhood profile for every cell.
To build it, the package takes three steps that we'll walk through one at a time:

1. Find the k nearest neighboring cells for each cell (`findNearCells`).

> 2. Convert the distances to those neighbors into probabilities, so that closer cells contribute more (`scanHoods`).

Reviewer: I really want to put probabilities in quotes here, but I think we can let it pass.

3. Group those per-neighbor probabilities by cell type, giving each cell a probability of being surrounded by each cell type (`mergeByGroup`).

The end result is a matrix with one row per cell and one column per cell type, where each value is the probability that the cell's local neighborhood contains that cell type.

### Setup the `hoodscanR` object

`hoodscanR` expects the annotation it should use to live in a standardized column called `cell_annotation`, and it expects the spatial coordinates to be in the `spatialCoords` of the object.
The `readHoodData()` function takes our existing SPE, copies the annotation column we point it at into `cell_annotation`, and returns a `SpatialExperiment` that is formatted the way the rest of the `hoodscanR` functions expect.

```{r setup-hood, live=TRUE}
# reformat the SPE for hoodscanR: the column named in `anno_col`
# is standardized to a column called `cell_annotation`
spe_hood <- hoodscanR::readHoodData(
  spe, 
  anno_col = "cell_types_lumped" # target cell annotation column
)

# print the modified object
spe_hood
```

Let's look at the `colData` of the new object.

```{r coldata-hood, live=TRUE}
head(colData(spe_hood))
```

> Notice that the `cell_types_lumped` column has been renamed to `cell_annotation`.

Reviewer: Oh, I don't like that at all. Copy it, sure, but don't rename! (Nothing to do about it though)

This is the expected name of the cell type column for the remaining functions we'll use in the `hoodscanR` package.

> <!--TODO: should we just do this instead? --> 

Reviewer: I hadn't seen this comment before my previous one, but yeah, I'd prefer this. Are there any other changes that `readHoodData()` makes?

Note that we could have also done this by adding in a new column named as `cell_annotation` with `spe$cell_annotation <- "cell_types_lumped"`. 

### Generate the probability matrix

The first step is to find the nearest neighbors for each cell based on physical distance.
`findNearCells()` does this using an approximate nearest-neighbor search, returning the `k` closest cells for every cell in the dataset.
Note that distance here is the Euclidean distance between the x and y coordinates on the slide. 

The choice of `k` sets the size of the neighborhood we're describing.
<!--TODO: Fill in some more information about choosing k and why we're using the default-->
 
```{r nearest-neighbors, live=TRUE}
# for each cell, find its k nearest neighboring cells
neighbors <- hoodscanR::findNearCells(
  spe_hood, 
  k = 100, # number of nearest neighbors to consider for each cell
  anno_col = "cell_annotation" # default 
)
```

What's inside this object? 

> We have `cells` and `distance`.

Reviewer: I would show this with a call to `str()`?

Both are matrices. 

The `cells` matrix has one row per cell and one column per neighbor (`nearest_cell_1` through `nearest_cell_100`).
Each entry is the cell type of that neighbor.

```{r inspect-cells, live=TRUE}
neighbors$cells |> 

>   head()

Reviewer: This is printing as a data frame... is it that? Either way, I would probably do the same selection as below, showing the first 10 rows and 5 columns rather than using head.

Author: It is a dataframe, but I'll still adjust it to only print without head.

```

The `distance` matrix has the same shape, but each entry is the physical distance from the cell to that neighbor.

```{r inspect-distance, live=TRUE}

> neighbors$distance[1:10, 1:5]

Reviewer: You are almost certain to get a question about why the row labels are not sequential. I'm assuming this is related to earlier filtering, but we may want to address this directly. (It is also potentially confusing that they appear numeric but don't align with the selection numbers)

```

Next we convert those distances into probabilities with `scanHoods()`.

> For each cell, the distances to its neighbors are passed through a softmax transformation and then normalized so each cell's values sum to 1.

Reviewer: I assume you will explain softmax somewhere... in slides? My own understanding of softmax is that it includes the normalization step, unless there is a second normalization here that I am not understanding?

We'll use the default value of Tau, which is 1/5 * median(D), where D is the distance matrix. 
This is recommended by the authors to capture local neighborhoods. 

```{r prob-mtx, live=TRUE}
# convert neighbor distances into probabilities
prob_mtx <- hoodscanR::scanHoods(neighbors$distance)
```

In this matrix each row is a cell and each column is one of its 100 neighbors.
The value is the probability weight assigned to that neighbor, and because of the normalization every row sums to 1.

```{r inspect-prob-mtx, live=TRUE}
prob_mtx[1:10, 1:10]
```

Right now the columns are individual neighbors, which isn't very interpretable on its own.
`mergeByGroup()` fixes this by combining the neighbor probabilities according to the cell type of each neighbor by adding the probability weights of all neighbors that share a cell type.
It needs both the probability matrix (the weights) and the `cells` matrix (the cell type of each neighbor) to do this.

```{r merge-probabilities, live=TRUE}
# collapse the per-neighbor probabilities into one probability per cell type
hoods <- hoodscanR::mergeByGroup(
  prob_mtx, 
  neighbors$cells
)
```

> Now each row is still a cell, but the columns are cell types, and each value is the probability that the cell's neighborhood is made up of that cell type.

Reviewer: I might phrase it like this: 
```suggestion
Now each row is still a cell, but the columns are cell types, and each value is the probability that another cell in the focal cell's neighborhood is that cell type.
```

This at least aligns with how I understand probabilities and makes the value more interpretable to me.

These per-cell probabilities are the neighborhood profiles that we will explore for the rest of the notebook.

```{r inspect-hoods}
hoods[1:10, ]
```

A nice way to get a feel for these profiles is to plot them as a heatmap, with cells as rows and cell types as columns.
`hoodscanR` provides `plotHoodMat()` for this, but that function is a thin wrapper around `ComplexHeatmap` and doesn't expose many options, so we'll call `ComplexHeatmap::Heatmap()` directly.
That gives us full control over the appearance and makes it easy to adjust later.
We plot the first 100 cells here just to keep the heatmap legible.

```{r neighborhood-heatmap}
# plot the neighborhood profiles for the first 100 cells

ComplexHeatmap::Heatmap(

>   hoods[1:100,],

Reviewer: I'm somewhat torn over which way this should be plotted. I expect this is how the `hoodscanR` plots look, but I am so used to seeing cells as columns in other plots that it took me longer than I expected to interpret this. Might be a me thing.

  col            = scico::scico(200, palette = "acton", direction = -1),
  rect_gp        = grid::gpar(col = "white", lwd = 1),
  name           = "Probability",
  column_title   = "Probability of cell types\n within 100 nearest neighbors",
  column_title_gp = grid::gpar(fontsize = 15),
  column_dend_height = grid::unit(1, "cm"),
  row_dend_width = unit(1, "cm"),
  column_names_rot = 45,
  cluster_rows   = TRUE,     # group cells with similar profiles together
  cluster_columns = TRUE,    # group cell types that co-occur together
  show_row_names = FALSE     # hide per-cell labels; there are too many to read
)
```

> TODO: interpretation of the heatmap and point out blocks of cells with similar neighborhood profiles and which cell types cluster together.

Reviewer: I might come back to this to plot domain clusters as annotations on the cells?

Author: Hmm I tried to do this but since I'm only looking at 100 cells to keep things manageable it doesn't look very good. 

<img width="1259" height="778" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5f7015d1-6dd2-40da-af9b-6f407d2f1114" />

Reviewer: If you allow for more cells, how unmanageable is it? I do think there is value in the plot...

## Measuring neighborhood complexity 

A neighborhood profile can be dominated by a single cell type or a mix of many cell types.
`hoodscanR` quantifies this using perplexity, which is the effective number of cell types in the neighborhood. 
A perplexity near 1 means the neighborhood is essentially one cell type; a higher perplexity means a more mixed environment.

Before we can calculate these, we need to attach the neighborhood profiles back onto our SPE object with `mergeHoodSpe()`, which adds one column per cell type to the `colData`.

```{r merge-hood-spe, live=TRUE}
# merge the neighborhood profiles back into the spe object
spe <- hoodscanR::mergeHoodSpe(
  spe, 
  hoods
)

> # one column per cell type has been added, holding that cell's probability

Reviewer: Ugh, I don't like what I wrote here, but something differenent from just "cell's probability"
```suggestion
# one column per cell type has been added, holding the neighborhood probability for that cell type for each cell
```

colData(spe) |> 
  head()
```

Now we can calculate entropy and perplexity from those probability columns.

```{r calc-metrics}
# calculate entropy and perplexity from the neighborhood probability columns
spe <- hoodscanR::calcMetrics(
  spe, 
  pm_cols = colnames(hoods)
)

# now we can see both entropy and perplexity added to the colData
colData(spe) |> 
  head()
```

Since the columns are now in the SPE object, we can use the `ggspavis::plotCoords()` function we have used previously. 
We could use `hoodscanR::plotTissue()` but the plots are the same. 

```{r plot-perplexity}
# plot perplexity across the tissue to see where neighborhoods are more mixed
ggspavis::plotCoords(spe, annotate = "perplexity") +
  scale_color_viridis_c()
```

TODO: interpretation of the perplexity map and note where on the slide neighborhoods are more homogeneous vs. more mixed.

## Co-localization 

We can also use the neighborhood profiles to look at which cell types tend to be together, or co-localized.
`plotColocal()` answers this by first correlating the per-cell neighborhood probabilities across every pair of cell types and then plotting that correlation in a heatmap.

> TODO: Do we want to customize this plot more? If so we would need to show calculating the correlation first and then making the heatmap since we can't modify the heatmap directly. 

Reviewer: I think this plot looks pretty good; I would not see a need to customize it.

```{r plot-colocal}
#| fig.height: 5

# correlate neighborhood profiles between cell types to find co-localized pairs
hoodscanR::plotColocal(
  spe, 
  pm_cols = colnames(hoods),
  hm_width = 8,
  hm_height = 8
)
```

TODO: Some discussion about the cell types that are present in the same area
We see overlap in T cell populations, Endothelial with Perivascular-Like, and Myoepithelial with DCIS

## Domain detection 

The neighborhood profiles can also be used to partition the tissue into domains, or groups of cells with similar neighborhood profiles.

> `clustByHood()` does this by running k-means clustering on the per-cell neighborhood profiles, so cells are grouped by the company they keep rather than by their own expression.

Reviewer: I like the "company they keep" phrasing here.

This is conceptually related to domain-detection tools like `Banksy`, but the emphasis is different. 

> With `Banksy` we cluster cells based on both expression and distance from each other. 

Reviewer: I think this mischaracterizes Banksy a bit; it is using gene expression in the neighborhood, not really a direct distance measure.

Here we are clustering cells by their neighborhood composition and do not consider gene expression.

> TODO: Figure out k explanation

Reviewer: A bit torn here, as I do think this is something you want to have some space to explore. If not here then maybe in the exercise? I generally don't like elbow plots, but if it is the best we have...

As with `k` in the nearest-neighbor step, the number of clusters `k` here is a choice we have to make, and it strongly shapes the result.
It's worth spending time exploring a few values of `k` to find one that gives interpretable, stable domains.

```{r clust-domains, live=TRUE}
# cluster cells into spatial domains based on their neighborhood profiles
spe <- hoodscanR::clustByHood(
  spe, 
  pm_cols = colnames(hoods),
  k = 8 # number of domains; chosen after exploring a few values
)
```

We can see how many cells fall into each domain.

```{r domain-table, live=TRUE}
table(spe$clusters)
```

Now we can map the domains back onto the tissue.

```{r plot-domains}
# plot the domains across the tissue
ggspavis::plotCoords(spe, annotate = "clusters", point_size = 0.1) + 
  scale_color_brewer(palette = "Dark2") +
  guides(color = ggplot2::guide_legend(
      override.aes = list(size = 3), # enlarge the legend keys so colors are readable
      title = "domains"
  ))
```

TODO: interpretation of the domain map

> For each domain, we can look at which cell types it is made of by plotting the distribution of neighborhood probabilities within each domain.

Reviewer: I might do this before plotting onto the tissue. I think it helps to have some idea of what the domains represent first, then see where they are.

> ```{r plot-probdist}

Reviewer: Style comments about this plot:

- I would make it bigger; the current size is hard to read/interpret
- Along with making it bigger, I might explore keeping the x labels for each row of plots, just because it can be hard to follow the labels across plots
- alternatively, can you add colors for the cell types?

#| fig.height: 4

# for each domain, show the distribution of neighborhood probabilities per cell type
hoodscanR::plotProbDist(
  spe, 
  pm_cols = colnames(hoods), 
  by_cluster = TRUE, 
  plot_all = TRUE, 
  show_clusters = seq(8), # show all 8 domains (default only shows 6)
  outlier.size  = 0.1     # shrink the boxplot outlier points
) + 
  # default is 3 columns, but let's use 4
  facet_wrap(vars(clusters), ncol = 4) +
  # and remove the strip background
  theme(strip.background = element_rect(fill = "transparent"))
```

TODO: Some text about domains dominated by one cell type (3 and 8 are DCIS and tumor) vs a mix of cell types (4 and 5)

The overall complexity of cell types present within a domain should also be reflected in the perplexity measure we looked at earlier. 
We can plot the perplexity for all cells in each domain and see if that is true. 

> ```{r plot-perplexity-domains}

Reviewer: I'm not sure we need this figure, but I also don't find it particularly problematic, so up to you.

# which expects a column named `cell_annotation` to use for neighborhood identification
spe$cell_annotation <- spe$cell_types_lumped
```

Now let's check to see if the spatial coordinates are indeed present in `spatialCoords`. 

```{r setup-hood, live=TRUE}
spatialCoords(spe)[1:10, ]
```

Great, it looks like our object is all set to run `hoodscanR`.  

### Generate the probability matrix

The first step is to find the nearest neighbors for each cell based on physical distance.
`findNearCells()` does this using an approximate nearest-neighbor search, returning the `k` closest cells for every cell in the dataset.
Note that distance here is the Euclidean distance between the x and y coordinates on the slide. 

The choice of `k` sets the size of the neighborhood we're describing.
<!--TODO: Fill in some more information about choosing k and why we're using the default-->
 
```{r nearest-neighbors, live=TRUE}
# for each cell, find its k nearest neighboring cells
neighbors <- hoodscanR::findNearCells(
  spe, 
  k = 100, # number of nearest neighbors to consider for each cell
  anno_col = "cell_annotation" # default 
)
```

What's inside this object? 
We have `cells` and `distance`.

> Both are matrices. 

Reviewer: Feel free to remove my snark.
```suggestion
Both are matrices (all the same type), but the cells are stored as a data frame for some reason. 
```

Author: ```suggestion
Both are matrices (all the same type), but the cells are stored as a data frame.
```

```{r inspect-structure}

> str(neighbors)

Reviewer: If you want to truncate the display...
```suggestion
str(neighbors, list.len = 10)
```
or even more

```suggestion
str(neighbors, max.level = 1)
```

It needs both the probability matrix (the weights) and the `cells` matrix (the cell type of each neighbor) to do this.

```{r merge-probabilities, live=TRUE}
# collapse the per-neighbor probabilities into one probability per cell type
hoods <- hoodscanR::mergeByGroup(
  prob_mtx, 
  neighbors$cells
)
```

Now each row is still a cell, but the columns are cell types, and each value is the probability that another cell in the focal cell's neighborhood is that cell type.
These per-cell probabilities are the neighborhood profiles that we will explore for the rest of the notebook.

```{r inspect-hoods}
hoods[1:10, ]
```

A nice way to get a feel for these profiles is to plot them as a heatmap, with cells as rows and cell types as columns.
`hoodscanR` provides `plotHoodMat()` for this, but that function is a thin wrapper around `ComplexHeatmap` and doesn't expose many options, so we'll call `ComplexHeatmap::Heatmap()` directly.
That gives us full control over the appearance and makes it easy to adjust later.
We plot the first 100 cells here just to keep the heatmap legible.

```{r neighborhood-heatmap}
# plot the neighborhood profiles for the first 500 cells

ComplexHeatmap::Heatmap(

>   t(hoods[1:500,]), # transpose so cells are columns

Reviewer: Definitely better with more cells.

It's worth spending time exploring a few values of `k` to find one that gives interpretable, stable domains.

TODO: Do we want to keep this in instruction or move to exercise notebook? 
Note that this does take 2-3 minutes to run. 

```{r}
# candidate numbers of domains to try
k_range <- 2:12

# construct a dataframe with value of k and within-cluster sumo f squares
elbow_df <- tibble::tibble(k = k_range) |>
  dplyr::mutate(
    # fit k-means on the neighbourhood probability matrix for each k...
    fit  = purrr::map(k, \(x) kmeans(hoods, centers = x, nstart = 25, iter.max = 50)),
    # and pull out the total within-cluster sum of squares
    wcss = purrr::map_dbl(fit, "tot.withinss")
  )

# make the elbow plot
ggplot(elbow_df, aes(x = k, y = wcss)) +
  geom_line(colour = "grey60") +
  geom_point(size = 2.5) +
  scale_x_continuous(breaks = k_range) +
  labs(
    title    = "Elbow plot for domain identification",
    x = "Number of domains (k)",
    y = "Total within-cluster sum of squares (WCSS)"
  )
```

```{r clust-domains, live=TRUE}
# cluster cells into spatial domains based on their neighborhood profiles
spe <- hoodscanR::clustByHood(
  spe, 
  pm_cols = colnames(hoods),

>   k = 8 # number of domains, chosen from the elbow plot above

Reviewer: This is why I hate elbow plots. I would have chosen 5 or 6. I know there is a stat you can calculate though, did you happen to do that?

Another advantage of 6 is that it may make the later plots a bit easier to read, with just a bit more space.

Author: > I know there is a stat you can calculate though, did you happen to do that?

Are you talking about the kneedle algorithm I've used in the past to find the maximum? That is a bit complicated for this so I was just going to choose one. 

I will also note that when I was playing around with this originally I was going back and forth between 6-8. Maybe I'll use 6 then just to simplify plots.

Reviewer: Yeah, that was it. I wouldn't suggest including it here, but I was curious what it would say.

# plot the domains across the tissue
ggspavis::plotCoords(spe, annotate = "clusters", point_size = 0.1) + 
  scale_color_brewer(palette = "Dark2") +
  guides(color = ggplot2::guide_legend(
      override.aes = list(size = 3), # enlarge the legend keys so colors are readable
      title = "domains"
  ))
```

TODO: interpretation of the domain map

The overall complexity of cell types present within a domain should also be reflected in the perplexity measure we looked at earlier. 
We can plot the perplexity for all cells in each domain and see if that is true. 

```{r plot-perplexity-domains}
# pull the colData into a data frame for plotting with ggplot2
coldata_df <- colData(spe) |> 
  as.data.frame()

# using perplexity to measure the complexity of each domain
ggplot(coldata_df, aes(y = perplexity, x = clusters)) +
  ggforce::geom_sina(size = 0.5) +
  theme_bw() +
  labs(
    x = "Domain",
    title = "Perplexity of cells in each domain"
  )
```

TODO: text around confirming that the single-cell-type domains have low perplexity and the mixed domains have high perplexity.

We can also go back to the heatmap of the neighborhood profile and include the domain annotations. 

> ```{r domain-heatmap}
> domain_annotations <- ComplexHeatmap::columnAnnotation(
>   "Domain" = spe$clusters[1:500]
> )
> 

Reviewer: We definitely want the colors to match. I think I got this right?
```suggestion
domain_colors <- setNames(
  palette.colors(n = 8, palette = "Dark2"),
  1:8
)

domain_annotations <- ComplexHeatmap::columnAnnotation(
  "Domain" = spe$clusters[1:500]
  cols = list("Domain" = domain_colors)
)

```
